W06 Assignment:  Explain Polymorphism, James Leight, CSE210

Polymorphism is the coding technique where a parent class defines a method and that method is overridden and executed in a unique manner for each of many children classes inheriting that parent class.  The method executes a unique function depending on the context of which child class is tied to the method.  There are a few ways to architect this in a set of code one is to define a parent method and then override the method in some of the children;p another is to not define the method in the parent and leave it blank and then make sure to define it in each of the children classes.

A benefit of Polymorphism is that the parent class can organize the structure of the categories of methods for all the possible children classes/objects.  This allows the interface to the category of classes to be cleanly defined so that code uses the category or group of classes in a discipliend and consistent manner that retains all the benefits of encpasulation.  Another benefit is that polymorphism allows flexibility to define specific unique children classes that implement a method commonly used by other children classes in a unique way.  It helps to keep the benefits of encapsulation in more unique coding circumstances.

As an example of polymorphism different than those used in the activity or project.  Assume you have a parent class Car and two children classes GasCar and ElectricCar.  The calculation of miles per $ could be captured in a method CalculateMPD().  For a GasCar it would be miles / gallons of gas / dollars per gallon.  For an electric car it would be miles / duration of travel * duration of full charge / dollars per charge.  Both are calculations of efficiency of money spent to travel but they are calculated based on the category of Car.

The key code words used are virtual or abstract in the parent class method and override in the child class method:
// parent class
public abstract class Car
{
    private float _miles;
    public abstract CalculateMPD();
}
// child class
public class GasCar : Car
{
    private _gallons
    public override float CalculateMPD()
    {
        return _miles / _gallons;
    }
}

The other child class ElectricCar would be implemented in the similar and appropriate manner to specifically define CalculateMPD()