W07 Assignment:  Explain Programming With Classes, James Leight, CSE210

The first principle of Programming with Classes is Abstraction.  This principle is to take the purpose of the program and the associated complex ideas and break it down into managable smaller ideas.  Abstraction breaks down the architecture of the software product into adequately small and clear and concise pieces so that the developer (me) can handle it in my non-AI brain.

I used the principle of abstraction in every project I completed in CSE210.  The Eternal Quest project kept track of multiple types of personal goals.  So each type of goal was first divided down into its own individual class aka object.  Then the attributes or data parameters associated with each object were defined, the behaviors or methods or functions that used those attraibutes were defined, and some additional methods for making a new object and loading data into the attributes were defined.  Then for each type of goal, I could work step by step on each function/method and test it out and then move onto the next method until the entire program was completed.

Becuase of using abstraction, it will be straightforward to add additional attributes and/or methods in the future if the requirements for the software product change.  It is just a matter of modifying the relevant methods or adding methods or attraibutes as needed and modifying the constructor methods.

The second principle of Programming with Classes is Encapsulation.  This principle ensures that when changes are made to an individual Class that it is not needed to go through and modify every line of code that includes refenreces to the methods of that class.  One part of this is to prohibit access to the attribute variables, except through a contstructor to initially load the parameter values or through a method that will use the data to return or display results.

I used the principle of encapsulation in the Eternal Quest project to prevent direct access to the attribute values after they were loaded by initializing an object.  The loaded parameters are only available by running a method on the object.  So later on if I want to change the method or change the name of the attributes, the impacted code is limited to the methods in the class and not any external code that uses the class.

Later if the software product requriements change and the parameter/attribute names need to change, then the code will still work as the changes to the code will be limited to the script in the individual class file.

The third principle of Programming with Classes is Inheritance.  This principle allows newly defined classes to be based on or derived from an original class.  It allows code to be reused.  It also allows for hierarchical organization of the software architecture.  This additional organization can allow entire portions of code and files to be reused in other software prodcucts.

I used the prinicple of inheritance in the Eternal Quest program by defining a base class for goals and then multiple derived classes for specific types of goals.  Attributes and methods and constructors that were common among all the derived classes utilzied the code from the base class.  The architecture segment for the goals were separted from a class created to manage the program.  So one class managed the software execution and used the other structure of classes to store and execute behaviors on the data.

Later, this architecutre could continue to be extended by adding other managers for other totally separate set of requriements.  Managers could be architected into a base manager class with a separate manager for Goals, for Finances, for etc.  I can imagine that highly complex and capable software products can be developed and continually evolved based on this inheritance principle.

The fourth principle of Programming with Classes is Polymorphism.  This principle allows flexibility with inheritance in that it keeps derived classes from being tied down to the methods defined in the base class.  It allows methods to be overridden to ensure that subtle and different behaviors can be defined based on the context and needs of the class.  Even if every specific implementation of the method is different in each derived class, polymorphism allows structure in the architecture to be established an inforced to that the use of the family of derived classes is consistent.

I used the principle of polymorphism in the Eternal Question program mainly by establshing the architecture and then specifically implementing the methods for each derived class.  So the needs of the project were mainly to make a consistent architecture in the software product.

Later, if the software product requriements change to add more derived classes, none of the other code needs to change and the interface from external calls to the methods will stay the same.  Note that for generating a string representation to put together all of the parameters for each in a list of object types, I could define if statements to cover each case, but there are pros and cons as if additional derived classes are defined later, I would either need to add the additional types to the if chain or addional derived classes could simply override the function.  In some examples, the base class only allocates the methods and gives no definition, in other cases new class definitions can reuse code and make the development effort efficient.
